Title: Now
Slug: now
Date: 2024-08-05T22:51:43-07:00
tldr: What Guru Das Srinagesh is up to now

#### Now

This is a [/now page](https://nownownow.com/about).

Last Updated: August 2024.

⚒️  I [created my own shell]({filename}/blog/codecrafters-build-your-own-shell.md)
using Rust and Codecrafters! Quite proud of myself for taking steps towards learning
more things by doing.

⚒️  I ended up taking a short break from Project 5 of the [NAND2Tetris
course](https://www.nand2tetris.org/) to work on the Codecrafters Shell. Project 5
is about building the actual computer using the RAM and ALU chips built in previous
projects.

🫂 Went to India recently for my sister's wedding and had a lot of fun! Visited
friends old and new, family members, and visited places of historical and cultural
interest.

🎮 My wife recently gifted me a Sony Playstation 5. A close friend of mine (a
long-time gamer) recommended that I start with [Uncharted
4](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Uncharted_4:_A_Thief%27s_End) as a newbie to console
gaming. I took his suggestion and have been playing almost every day. I am almost
near the end of the story and both the gameplay and the visuals have been
breathtaking so far.

📖 I have been reading Frank Herbert's Dune series on my wife's Kindle ever since I
watched Denis Villeneuve's movie adaptation (both parts). It's been slow going but
it's an essential part of my lunchtime routine at work when I don't have company. My
lunch carry bag has a side flap that the Kindle fits neatly into, so it's perfect.

⚡ I'm experiencing an awakening of sorts and realizing I've been on autopilot for
many years - both at work as well as in life. I am working on making some changes to
align myself more with my true feelings and stop living in fear so much.

🦉 I've rejoined [Duolingo Latin](https://www.duolingo.com/course/la/en/Learn-Latin)
with all reminders turned off. Don't want to end up with bottled-up resentment due to
its many nagging reminders.

🏋🏾 Still working on developing a daily routine involving some physical exercise,
meals at the "proper" times, and adequate sleep at the end of the day.

---
